I grew up poor, though I didn’t know it.
My parents worked very hard to shield me
from the fact that certain bills would be paid
on alternating months, since there was never
enough money to pay everything, that we lived in
low-income housing, and that even then a portion
of our rent each month was covered by my father
mowing the lawns and shovelling the drive ways
of other houses in the housing group. I never
knew that my mother would borrow money from
relatives to make sure that I had Christmas,
and then pay it back over the next few months.
I never knew these things when I was a kid. I
didn’t find out until I was a teenager and my
parents separated. When suddenly very
little money became a whole lot less.
When my mother and I had to move
into a house so poorly insulated
that the first floor was never, ever warm.
It got so frigid that you had to run up the
stairs when you made food in the winter or else
it’d be cold by the time you got to your room.
But almost everyone I knew was in the same
situation. I was lucky enough to be an only child,
so I had it a lot easier than my friends, who
had to share what little they got with multiple
siblings. And so in order to get by, crime was
just a fact of life. But nobody looked at it
as really breaking the law, because
people weren’t stealing from each other.
They were stealing from Walmart or other big
stores. Things would just fall off the back of
a truck. For most of the people I grew up with you
were getting a game console for Christmas or your
birthday, it meant that Best Buy’s inventory
was missing a few Xbox’s or PlayStations.
Almost every adult I knew worked under the table,
their employer paying them without claiming them
as an employee, and that way neither of them had
to pay taxes. The whole area I grew up in was
peppered with bartenders, fishermen, mechanics,
repairmen, maids, cleaners, you name it. All of
them working under the table. Because the island I
grew up on had its economy completely collapse in
the 1980s when the coal mines and steel mills,
which had been the economic lifeblood of the
place for over a hundred years, were sold off to
a German energy conglomerate and then closed down.
Everyone lost their jobs, their benefits,
and their hope. And since so many people had
been injured on the job throughout the years,
taking pain killers to keep working, they were
suddenly without the ability to pay for the meds
too. So they had to start buying pain meds from
family who had pensioned out, and therefore had
drug plans, in order to do the backbreaking jobs
that they could manage to find. Which, sadly,
led to my hometown getting the nickname of
CottonTown, because OxyContin was its main import.
This video isn’t my autobiography though, or
about the town I grew up. There’s been enough
news coverage about that little island going to
hell in a hand basket for a hundred video essays.
But I just wanted to set the scene
so you understand where I’m coming
when I talk about the necessity of crime in
certain situations. How not all criminals
are bad people, and how a lot of people are
shunted into the category of criminal because
of where society has placed them, and how
successful society will allow them to become.
All of this so that I can talk about Banana Fish.
If you’re not into relatively obscure violent,
crime anime based on 30 year old manga,
you probably have no idea what Banana Fish
is. I sure as hell didn’t. I thought it was
either a disgusting sushi dish, or a really smelly
banana. And then I sat down to watch it, which was
a blessedly easy process thanks to Amazon Prime
Video, and binged the 24 episodes in two days.
And see, I get headaches if I look at screens
for too long, so watching subtitled media
is kind of hard for me. And since Banana Fish
doesn’t have an English dub, I had to grin and
bear a pounding headache to get through it.
But I had to. I had to find out what happens.
Banana Fish is a 2018 anime, based on the
1985 manga by Akimi Yoshida, that deals with
organised crime in New York City, all the way from
street gangs, where our main character Ash exists,
to mafia-like organisations, all the way up
to political power players like US senators.
But really, REALLY, it's about the relationship
between the tough American street kid, Ash,
and an innocent young Japanese photographer,
Eiji. Ash isn’t your typical gang banger though.
He spends more time in the New York Public library
than in drug dens, is well read, has a dark past
he prefers to keep secret from most people, and
has a hard time seeing a life that doesn’t involve
violence and pain. He’s shrouded in a cloud of
pessimism, while Eiji is eternally optimistic.
The series cold opens during the Iraq war, an
American soldier named Griffin fires on his own
squad in an apparent mental breakdown. He is
subdued when Max, a friend and fellow soldier,
shoots him in the legs. As Griffin
collapses, he mutters… "banana fish".
Twelve years later, Griffin,
now essentially catatonic,
is cared for by his younger brother Ash, the
leader of a street gang in New York. One night,
Ash encounters a dying man who gives him a vial of
an unknown substance and an address in California;
the man says the words "banana fish" before dying.
Ash begins to investigate the meaning of "banana
fish", though he is impeded by Dino Golzine,
a Corsican mob boss who has groomed Ash as
a child to be his sex slave and heir to his
criminal empire. He’s not very happy that
Ash has managed to gain some independence,
and wants his trophy boy back.
In the course of Ash’s investigation, Ash
meets Eiji Okumura, a photographer’s assistant,
who travelled from Japan
to report on street gangs.
He’s immediately intrigued by the older boys
innocence and his… pole vaulting prowess.
I’m sure there’s a double entendre there.
When Ash ends up in prison after
being, more or less, framed for murder,
he’s visited by Eiji and slips him a note by,
well, sticking his tongue down his throat.
Which Eiji really doesn’t seem to mind one bit.
The note gives Eiji directions on how to help Ash
via getting word to an associate in ChinaTown.
Things go awry though. One thing leads
to another and Ash’s brother, Griffin
is killed in the crossfire between two gangs.
Ash soon makes bail, finds out about his
brother's death, and swears revenge on the
people who killed him. Eiji, being a wee bit
pig-headed, demands to come too, along with
a few other people who more or less want to help
Ash revenge his way across New York’s underworld.
But first they need to take a trip to California,
to the address Ash was given by the dying man.
On their way there they make a little stop over
in the small hamlet Ash spent most of his early
childhood in. This is where we see the hardened
criminal open up to Eiji, using the process of
teaching him how to handle a pistol to get close
to him. After Gozine’s men find them though,
a shootout ensues, but our main team make it out
alive and get back on the road to California.
Once there they find a mansion occupied
by a man revealed to be Lee Yut-Lung,
the youngest son of China's largest crime family.
They later encounter the home's true occupant,
a doctor who informs them that
Banana Fish is an untraceable
drug that brainwashes its users — turning
them into near thoughtless murder machines.
Golzine intends to sell the drug to the
United States government, which seeks
to use it to overthrow communist and leftist
regimes in South America. This sounds absurd,
but look up some of the stuff Regan did in South
America in the 1980s. It’s not that far-fetched.
The group is almost immediately captured by
Golzine's men and taken back to New York.
Once there, Shorter Wong, Ash’s best friend, is
injected with the Banana Fish serum to show off
what it can do. He’s instructed to kill Eiji.
Shorter attacks Eiji in a frenzy, though in a
moment of lucidity, he is able to beg Ash to
kill him. Ash is given a gun with one bullet…
Kill Shorter, or kill himself. He shoots and kills
his best friend to prevent him from killing Eiji.
This sends Ash into a violent spiral, and he
ends up cutting a bloody swath through Golzine’s
mansion in order to save Eiji once again, after
he’d been locked away by the mob boss’s men.
Ash rescues him and the mansion is set ablaze.
Once in hiding, Ash and Eiji are
able to have another calm moment.
Their first since before leaving for
California. Where we learn that Ash has…
a very bad temper and no patience when
it comes to his goons, especially when
it involves his sleep. He can violently react
to being woken up… but not when Eiji does it.
As the story moves forward,
becoming more and more complex,
involving intergang rivalries, financial
espionage, and ghosts from Ash’s past…
Ash and Eiji become more and more the focus
of the story, with even the opening titles
changing to make it even clearer that
these two are more than just friends.
But in the end, as the series comes
to a close, we’re given a chance
to hope that this story may just have a happy
ending. Though Eiji is safely heading back
to Japan while Ash remains in New York, his
enemies seemingly vanquished, Eiji does leave
the door open for Ash to join him by giving
him a prepaid ticket to join him in Japan.
An ongoing thread throughout the series
is how much more dangerous America
is than The Land of the Rising Sun, and that Ash
is too kind a person to not have a peaceful life.
It seems like Ash is going to take Eiji up on
his offer, but while reading the letter Edji left
behind for him, he’s stabbed by, seemingly, the
last person in New York who might want him dead.
Ash kills the assailant, but may be mortally
wounded himself. He manages to bring himself
back to the New York Public library. The place
he’s always had the most peace. While Eiji waits
for him at the airport, hope wafting away,
Ash lays his head down on a table and dies.
RECORD SCRATCH
No he doesn’t die, goddammit.
And this isn’t me saying,
no he doesn’t die because he and Eiji are too
cute together, and he doesn’t deserve to die.
I have proof!
As the show was airing the banana fish website
kept an up to date tracker of which major
characters were dead, and which were alive. More
and more characters having their image and names
greyed out as the show went along. When the
series finale first aired, Ash’s photo and name
became greyed out but very soon after, went back
to color. Which means… he’s not dead. Like I said.
He DOES die in the manga, but plenty changed
from the Manga to the Anime, And since we see
Ash take a hell of a lot more punishment
than a knife wound throughout the series,
I’m not willing to believe that he’s dead.
And there’s too many plot threads left open
for a sequel. So you’re not going to
change my mind on this. Our blond Mary
Sue with the dead eye aim, master hacker
capabilities, and sky high IQ is alive.
Anyway.
The relationship between Ash and Eiji in Banana
fish is a lot like that of Victor and Yuri
in Yuri on Ice. It’s subtle, but not queer
coding. And I think it works best that way.
Many older men in the show
who are portrayed as “gay”
could easily be read as straight by anyone who
understands the psychology of sexual predators.
They don’t fall in love with men, they abuse
them. Especially men below the legal age.
For them, it’s a power fantasy, just
like with sexual predators in real life.
Ash himself was forced into the life of a
sex slave through his early teen years at
the hands of Golzine, but escapes
that life of abuse and organized,
white color crime by turning to a life
of petty, and not so petty, crime.
The sexual pradators in and around Golzine’s orbit
are just that, predators. Not necessarily gay men.
But Ash and Eiji… we never see them have sex.
There’s a kiss, almost as soon as they meet,
but that’s shown as passing on information
that Ash needs to smuggle out of prison.
Ash using Eiji as a means to an end, just like
he’s been used throughout his life. But over
time he doesn’t just come to like and respect
Eiji, but he falls in love with him. Sharing
with him parts of himself that he thoroughly
kept hidden from everyone else in his life.
Eiji, on the other hand, begins the story as an
innocent, almost damsel in distress type. Who,
over the course of the series, becomes
willing to break more and more laws,
but only to save Ash’s life. In a series
filled with criminals of all ranks and sorts,
Eiji is only willing to become one to
save the life of the person he loves.
Showing the audience that desperate times can make
a criminal out of anyone. Even the most innocent,
sweet hearted boy in the world. Ash even gets
angry with him when he does break the law, even
to rescue Ash, because he wants Eiji to keep being
the good guy, and not get drawn into this world.
Crime, for Ash, is a way of life. It’s how he
survived as long as he has. And while a queer
protagnost being a violent criminal may have
some suburban gays clutching their pearls,
Watching the show, I didn’t bat an eye.
Because a relationship between queer people
and criminal behaviour isn’t at all new.
Though it may be a rallying cry and a
meme now, ‘Be Gay Do Crime’ was once a
matter of propaganda against queer communities.
Established powers throughout the better part
of the last two hundred years at least, meant to
warn people about the degeneracy of queer people
and illicit lifestyles. Drugs, crime, sex,
death, and worse — unchristianly thoughts.
The public image of gay people, then referred
to as ‘sexual inversion’ or ‘sexual deviants’
was generally expected to be
poor and dirty, or predatory.
Granted, though, this was at the
same time of European history
when England had to launch a
multimedia effort that included
posters, pamphlets, anglican church missives,
fiction, and even spreading via word of
mouth — NOT to send your boys to Italy.
Rich families noticed that after their sons
toured Europe, something about them would
change after they spent a few months in Italy.
The combination of a prevalent casual approach
towards sex, a culture focused around pursuing
artistic romance, and simply being one of the
most scenic landmasses on the damn planet,
usually culminated in cold, English boys’
sexual hang-ups being eroded by the hordes
of beautiful Italians with a ‘when in Rome’
attitude when it came to 69ing with other guys.
And that’s to say nothing of queer
hotspots in Europe throughout history.
The Netherlands, Paris, Berlin, Copenhagen,
Munich, Vienna – even pre-world-war Turkey. That
isn’t to say that you could live a queer life
without consequences in these places, though Italy
stood out to conservative Europe as there was a
degree of tolerance even within
rural sections of the country.
It’s hard to be proud of a national
history that was established by a bunch
of bisexual senators and emperors
and cling to casual homophobia.
The real threat
were the scandalous solicitors in Hyde Park!
Or… something, something, hide your children.
In a way… even in modern media, we… somewhat…
continue to propagate that line of thinking.
Though the clean, suburban-friendly gay dad
may be the consencus media portrayal of gay
men now — to the point where depicting gay men in
an area of criminality is now something that will
get you blacklisted by the HRC - we are wrought
with depictions of trans and bisexual people who
are either poor, dependant on criminal income,
or the overused trope of the bisexual villain.
Whose ubiquitous sex drive OBVIOUSLY means they’re
hypersexual and promiscuous. And therefore evil.
As gay men and women begin to push their newfound
influence into the business of media production,
the gay criminal has shifted to the
bisexual criminal, or the trans criminal.
And media which still depicts gay people as
criminals has become exceedingly uncommon.
And yet, within the queer community
remains a solidarity with crime,
and with resistance to the law. Why is that?
Well… unfortunately, this is one of those
instances in which state-produced propaganda was…
not really wrong.
Propaganda about queer links to crime was only
really dishonest for omitting queer elites. But
it was not dishonest about the fact that London’s
West End was once a very colourful neighbourhood.
Hyde park after dark, famously became a venue for
sexual exhibitionism and sex work solicitation.
Drugs, stolen goods, and unsavoury types all drove
property values in the district down. This allowed
the torrents of disowned queer people to have a
place to live in a city that saw them as scum.
And as the queer class was considered undesirable,
upstanding businesses usually
refused to take them on payroll.
Many who wished to be open or at least who were
unable to be closeted, needed to take work where
they could get it. And sometimes, that wasn’t
always by taking jobs your mama would approve of.
For younger ones, that meant prostitution. Leading
to the rise of the famous London Rent-Boy culture.
By omitting the fact that fancy boys travelling
to and from Italy would return with homosexual
liberation, media and political messaging
perpetuated the idea that homosexuality
automatically brought delinquency. And
then used that as justification, in part,
for the systemic persecution of gay men
and the attempted persecution of gay women.
Beyond England, presenting the link between
homosexuality and crime as a simple fact
is part of virtually every national
effort to persecute gay people.
(And trans people as they became more visible.)
So what? Am I agreeing with the link
that queer people and crime is inherrant?
No… I’m saying that a link between crime and any
kind of ‘second class citizen’ is inevitable.
I’ve touched on this before and it’s worth
mentioning again. Oscar Wilde, renowned author,
editor, playwright, poet, businessman, and
darling of the English theatre at his hayday,
was also infamously one of those high-profile
buggery cases that the English government wishes
people would really just forget about. His very
public prosecution, once used to fighten little
gay children, is now a source of national
embarrassment for the British parliament.
(As if they don’t have enough to
be embarrassed about, already.)
Oscar Wilde, leading up to the trial, was
heavily engaged in the English queer underground,
and factored in a number of his
observations into his writing.
Across several of his works, he explored the
idea of an ‘illicit identity.’ If there is an
identity which the state considers ‘illegal’
— what does that do to someone’s psychology?
If, for instance, the penalty for having red hair
is the same criminal punishment as smoking
opium (and the English do like to pretend
red-heads ought to be illegal) — if you have
red hair… why not smoke a heap of opium?
If the consequences for simply existing are the
same as criminal behaviour, then it’s not like
actively deciding to be a criminal is gonna
make it all that much worse for you, is it?
Why not do all those fast-living,
young-dying, acts of delinquency that
your parents warned you are things ‘propper’
folk would never do? Vandalise property,
pick some pockets, lift some goods off the
back of that waggon, break into that house,
smoke all these drugs, go with a band of
dwarves to steal some gold from a dragon.
If living a criminal life and holding
the wrong person’s hand are going to get
you the same sentencing — or worse — why not
live an exciting life before you get caught?
And then because some in the minority group can
be found guilty of a certain crime, it must mean
that that’s something any of them could be capable
of. This is something used against more than just
queer people — also immigrant populations
and… people who generally aren’t white.
Politicians, even liberals, are prone to using
language that influences voters to believe that
criminality is inherent in minority
communities. That if, say, the nation
lets in refugees from South America they
will, quote: “bring their crimes with them.”
Because the crimes were always with these people
– these crimes are an element of their culture
that they are bringing into America
where they will spread it among the good,
heterosexual, cisgender, god-fearing white folk.
And because politics is all about ignoring nuance
for the sake of cashing in on cheap thrills,
there are some factors of the human element that
are deliberately being exempt from the discussion.
First: human beings, on a fundamental,
physiological, instinctual level are driven
to survive. More than that, we are driven to
assure the survival of those in our selected
family. Chosen or not. We will do almost
anything it takes to facilitate this survival.
It’s… literally our biology. There is no
point in debating this. There’s no point
in arguing with this. Survival, either of the
self or the group, is our number one objective.
And trying to deny this, or say that there
should be ‘limits’ to what we do to survive,
while might be justified as ‘logical’, is simply
not taking into account the human reality.
In order to survive, humans will break social
conventions (some of which being laws).
Second: …we exist in a network
of social structures that we call
‘society.’ Many of these social structures
(and you can debate this all you want but it
won’t make it less true) serve to hold
some people up at the expense of others.
We’re naturally competitive. Many of us find
a reward in being better than others somehow,
and some of us prefer more quantifiable ways:
those who have more and those who have less.
There cannot be the strong without the weak,
and some people have a dysfunctional
obsession with strength.
And factor in a dark ages hard
social reset followed by imperialism,
eurocentrism, colonialism, post-colonialism,
orientalism, a network of slavery over three
continents, and two world wars… and you’ve
got a socially permissable means to visually
profile people and sort them into social classes.
These principles are so deeply internalised in our
social, economic, political, and legal framework
that we can’t even be completely aware
of where the separation is between all of
that and what is truly human.
As a result, there are some groups of people
who are locked into such an old-standing system
of prejudices that they literally cannot
escape poverty. Being in these situations
of poverty lead to a heightened sense of the
need to survive. Which leads to a much looser
attitude around — not necessarily moral codes —
but removing the community’s moral code from the
stringent guidelines of laws that are designed to
protect the fundamental hierarchy of privilege.
You can’t really say that areas with
high crime rates have ‘loose morals’
when there are often strict no-snitching
social rules in that same neighbourhood,
and families helping each other out when times
are tough. This is a very clear indication,
to me, that human beings inherently want
morality. We want cooperation, we want society.
However, some groups of people simply
have been oppressed to the point
where the morals needed for their
own survival are not compatible with
the morals a given society would
like to foster among the populace.
Which should be seen as a
problem with society at large,
and not a problem that exists within
scattered impoverished communities.
Society has a way of disincentivizing conventional
morality among those who cannot afford it.
And then in turn, society
has a way of over-policing
those same neighbourhoods. And then in turn,
society has a way of branding these people as
social outsiders whenever they try to make
people aware of their economic condition.
So a huge portion of our social structures
are built around a human need for survival,
and then making survival inherently more
difficult for certain groups of people.
When you realise this, it
becomes very easy to predict
which groups of people are more likely to act
outside of social convention in order to survive.
And even if, in a consequentialist frame of mind,
they aren’t really to blame
for their economic situation,
establishment power will use this to create
fear-based propaganda in order to spur privileged
voters to support the existing hegemonistic
hierarchy. And then use this same line of thinking
to encourage voters to endorse voter-suppression
tactics against these marginalised communities.
The less these communities can
contribute to the political process,
the less control they have over legal processes,
the greater jurisdiction law enforcement has in
oppressing these groups, the greater the existing
hierarchy can perpetuate it’s agenda. And,
in turn, the less incentivized law enforcement
is to protect and serve the marginalised groups.
It also doesn’t help that law enforcement —
to this day — continues to under-investigate
crimes against queer people
and communities of color,
especially including, but not limited to,
sexual assault, murder, and disappearances.
The ‘red dress’ movement wasn’t just
to raise awareness about missing and
murdered first nations women — it
was calling to attention the fact
that these crimes are almost never
investigated in the first place.
Queer communities in particular have a… unique
relationship with this. Though Banana Fish
did depict the oppression of multiple minority
communities, it did little to depict the social
oppression of the queer community as a whole
and their relationship with the law. In fact,
the explicitly referenced queer characters, if
anything, function as class oppressors which…
This is based on a manga from the
80s, by all means read into that.
But queer communities function a little
differently from communities of color.
In part, because queer communities
are not homogenous in themselves.
Within a queer underground of a given city there
is a melting pot of many different cultures and
cultural experiences. But for the most part
Queer communities stand out because while we
may have been born queer, very few
of us were born into Queer culture.
In fact, there are many different ways one could
be queer, and even more ways to express that.
And if we’re talking about Queer Communities
and their relationship with the law…
what is a queer community?
As queerness, in whatever form it takes, has
been taboo in most of the Colonial world for
the better part of the last thousand years,
there tends to be a lot of homeless queer
kids. Go figure. I don’t understand how
the straights are still shooketh by this.
Why do you think people
are homeless to begin with?
Queerness is never really a threat to anything
but your family’s upstanding reputation or,
insofar as the Catholic church preferred
keeping the undesirable classes
as uneducated and god-fearing as possible,
a threat to your family’s ticket to heaven.
And suddenly you have a religious institution
built around forgiveness and compassion
where it is more ethically favourable
to disown and abandon your children
than to put up with a quirk
like who they like kissing.
Within this context, the ‘Queer’ Community, or the
Gay Community as it was called through the 1900s,
was a collection of people who had
either been abandoned by their family,
pushed out by the communities they grew up in, or
who had been from accepting families and simply
rallied together to be among like-minded people.
That last group was an unfortunately small one,
and though we’re getting
better, queer homelessness
is still the largest subsection of youth
homelessness in North America and Europe.
This isn’t to say that there wasn’t an
undertone of sexism and racism in queer circles,
and which there still is. So… as much as I
don’t want to frame this with rose-tinted
glasses… in theory the Queer community
was a place for a bunch of misfit people
who didn’t belong anywhere else, because almost
everywhere else rejected queerness in all forms.
However, persecution against queer people
was especially harsh because there was a
widespread public belief that queer people
actively chose to be the way they were.
And many within the queer community
came from communities that were already
impoverished and persecuted. So when outlining
a queer relationship with the law, we have to
understand that these were people who stared
down the barrel of survival nearly every day.
Some of us… even vogued for the
gunmen and commanded respect.
Dorian Corey began her career
as a dancer in the 1960s.
She had risen to become the house mother
of the House of Corey by the late 1970s,
walking the catwalk in underground drag balls
and appearing in shows all throughout Harlem.
Aside from her famed performances, Corey
was known for her elaborate ball gowns,
which included a 30-by-40-foot feather cape that
took multiple assistants to carry behind her.
It was that reputation as a seamstress that
led Corey’s friend and caretaker Lois Taylor
to enter her apartment on West 140th Street in
October 1993. Corey had died two months before of
AIDS-related complications and had directed Taylor
to take the costumes she wanted and sell the rest.
Once inside, Taylor discovered a drycleaning bag
containing the partially mummified body of a man
eventually identified as Robert Worley,
who had been missing since 1968.
Worley's body was wrapped in plastic wrap
and Naugahyde and doused in baking soda.
The case remains a mystery to this day,
despite the fact that many people believe
Corey killed Worley in self-defence. Both
Corey, a drag queen, and Worley, an addict,
both of which built a distrust
of authority, especially police.
With their deaths, the chance to know their
complete stories vanished, leaving true-crime
websites and podcasts of varying quality
to reassemble the pieces of their lives.
Fans of Pose will recognize this story as
the inspiration for Elektra Evangelista,
played by Dominique Jackson, in a two-season
plot arc. Elektra is working as a BDSM mistress
when one of her clients dies in
her room from a drug overdose.
Elektra, like Dorian, understands that the police
will not assist a Black transgender sex worker.
However, unlike in Dorian's story, audiences
know that Elektra has friends to call.
They use skills learned in making ball gowns to
assist her in sewing the man into a garment bag
and packing him in a trunk. When
Elektra is arrested in season three,
she uses her one phone call to inform
her house family that the trunk
in which the body is hidden must be
moved before the cops search her house.
Elektra's one-time daughter and now a house
mother herself, Blanca (played by MJ Rodriguez),
offers Elektra unconditional love and support.
In this storyline, viewers get to see the pain
in Elektra’s past, as well as the camaraderie and
joy on which she is able to draw in the present.
Crime is rampant in Pose. Whether its hiding a
dead body, using drugs, sex work, petty theft,
or lifting a regal display of opulent fashion from
the Metropolitan Museum of Art in order to win a
ball’s top prize. The series does not shy away
from the fact that it’s cast of characters are,
in the laws eyes at least, criminals. But it also
makes the point that, in many of these cases,
what other choice to they have?
Multiple characters on the show, both
male and female, are sex workers in
one way or another. Whether out and out
prostitution or, in one interesting case,
performing strip shows behind glass
for men willing to pay for the fantasy.
Certainly a safer way of going about things than
waiting on the corner and hoping to pick a John
who isn’t psychotic, and a 1980’s precursor
to the cam stars of the new millennium.
In most cases the show portrays these crimes
as victimless (lets note that Elektra’s dead
john overdosed all on his own), except when
the women being hired become the victims.
The show is clear that, when everyone is
being safe and everyone is concenting,
the crime of sex work is a victimless one.
The biggest stress of the job really stems
from the fact that if things do go south, the
girls have no recourse. They can’t go to the
police because they’ll likely be locked
up long before any man who hurt them is.
Is it their first choice of career? Not likely.
One character, Angel, played by Indya Moore,
starts out the series as a sex worker but
eventually transitions into modeling. But
they’re the only sex worker on the show to
find herself climing into the upper echelons.
Showing just how rare it is to fight your way
out of a life of crime into legitimate success.
Indya Moore themself was once a
sex worker. They told ES magazine:
“It has really destigmatised sex work, not only
for people watching the show but for me, too – I
had internalised so much shame. I felt really
ashamed of having been a sex worker and, coming
into this industry, it was something that I feared
I would be outed for and that it would harm me.”
They started in the field because, as a trans
non-binary youth who’d grown up in the foster
system, with no money and no real social safety
net in America, let alone health coverage,
they needed to find a way to pay for the hormones
required to be comfortable in their own body.
And since decent paying jobs aren't
exactly plentiful when you’re a queer,
person of Haitian, Puerto Rican, and Dominican
descent, they did what they had to do.
That’s how pretty much every character on
Pose who breaks the law ends up doing so.
Nobody is doing it… Mostly nobody is doing it
for shits and giggles, and nobody is doing it
specifically to hurt other people. They’re doing
it out of necessity. They’re doing it to survive.
Pose also highlights other people who break
the law in similarly desperate circumstances.
The people fighting back against the Regan’s
Administration’s ignoring of the AIDS crisis.
The men and women of ACT UP who
got arrested and charged over
and over again while protesting
the unfairness of the situation.
That thousands of people across the country
were being left to die by their own government.
Desperation is a seed that, once planted,
can bloom into crime, and eventually,
if the system isn’t careful, grow into violence.
But the system would rather arrest these people,
slapping the label of criminal on them
forever instead of trying to help them.
“Go through the proper channels” they’re told.
“Oh you want a treatment for AIDS? Well,
funding Contras in Nicaragua is far more
important than funding AIDS research.”
“You want an education that doesn’t leave
you a hundred thousand dollars in debt?
Sorry, we have tax breaks we need to pass.”
“You want to not die because you
can’t afford cancer treatment?
Sorry, but we’d much prefer to
fund fighter jets even though
no countries we’ve gone to war with in the
last 30 years have a f*cking fighter jet!”
And so, when you ask politely, and get slapped
in the face, what recourse do you have? Breaking
the law, of course. This is universal, but
particularly prescient for queer people,
especially trans people, when the entire
system is set up to keep you from existing.
Gender confirmation treatment and surgeries don’t
come cheap. And even if you’re in a country that
subsidises them, then they don't come fast. Decade
long wait lists for gender confirmation surgery
consultations, NOT the surgery. A decade just to
talk to a doctor about it. Or if you’re in the US,
you can make it happen a lot faster, but it
can cost upwards of a hundred thousand dollars.
And it’s very easy to say, well that’s
a problem for the queers. I’m fine.
Oh, are you?
The Supreme Court is set to rule on abortion
in 2022, and things aren’t looking good for a
woman’s right to choose. If abortions are made
illegal, even in the case of sexual assault,
you, a victim, may become a criminal as you
try to take control of your own body again.
Or how about if the housing market goes bust and
by no fault of your own, thanks to the convoluted
ways mortgages can change hands in America,
you’re told by the bank that you underpaid your
mortgage last month by a few cents, a payment
increase they neglected to inform you of.
And so you need to get the hell out of that
house. But you refuse. Now you’re a criminal.
Now the cops are going to come to your door and
force you out of your home. They’re not going
to arrest the finance experts who screwed you,
but they might just arrest you if you resist.
But, yet, a lot of people don’t see this.
They still see the trans sex worker, or the
desperate gay man pushed to desperate measures,
or the abused teenager running away from home
and doing what they need to do to survive…
they don’t see them like they see themselves.
And so a lot of people, an
awful lot of people are a-okay
with there being laws against sex
work or selling drugs, even weed,
or working under the table at a bar. An awful
lot of people think, yeah, put them in jail.
Or fine them, that’s more humane. But then when
they can’t pay the fine, where do they go? Prison.
What happens? They’re trapped in the system.
When they get out they have a big red CRIMINAL
stamped on their forehead when they try to get
a typical job and then… they’re forced back into
the same situation that got them put in prison
in the first place. Unless they have community to
help them, to hold them up, to protect them. But
the gay community isn’t exactly a great place
to turn to for help these days. Not anymore.
So many queer people with the means to
help other queer people really don’t care.
Look at Kristin Sinema, the bisexual
democratic senator from Arizona who has
basically made a caree lately of saying
“screw the poor”. She may be queer,
but she doesnt fight for the queer community.
It’s a very… “I got mine” attitude.
Running in tandem with establishment gay men
and women pressuring eccentricities out of queer
people, there is an ongoing push to recognize
the razor’s edge that Queer rights hang on.
A large component of what is referred to as
Queer Anarchy strives to understand the ways
in which Queer communities, as they were more or
less ignored by the political and legal power,
developed their own systems of
self-governance. These communal structures
were what led to the mass-mobilization
of queer and queer-supporting groups
in urban centres leading to a relatively
quick turnaround in terms of rights being won.
Now, you may hear the word ‘anarchy’ and be
frightened in a Satanic Panic kind of way.
And… this is in no small part due to the way that
privileged white people either use Anarchy as an
aesthetic, or assume that Anarchy is a matter of
founding a libertarian Mad Max, governmentless,
wild west. However, Anarchy has many
different branches and sub-schools of thought.
Generally speaking… Anarchists reject
prevailing political ideologies and
processes as being inherent or true. This
may mean they want governmental reform,
or that they want to replace
existing governments with new ones.
It may also mean that they want to be able to live
separately from federal or municipal oversight.
It’s where cryptocurrency comes from.
Like I said, this is a complicated movement,
and the media really does latch on to those
white kids from middle-income suburbs who
decide that rules are for fools in school… yo…
Subsequently, the same group
that drops out of college and
then become zombie apocalypse survivalists.
Queer Anarchism, actually, has a long history
predating many American queer communities as
we know them. Anarchist movements within these
circles analyse the ways in which the law itself
is designed for selective oppression.
How can a government which systematically
rejects certain citizens for a reason that is
entirely benign, call itself a civil society?
Evidently, they argue,
there must be an underlying institution which
benefits from certain people being oppressed,
exploiting a government system which is designed
to protect the interests of upper classes and…
Yeah the answer… is… usually capitalism.
If people are poor. People are desperate.
And if people are desperate,
then they are pliable.
And if people are pliable, and preferably
under-educated, then they completely believe
that you can’t raise the minimum wage
or else Elon Musk, speaking of crypto,
who worked hard for every one of his billions
of dollars, will personally… go homeless.
There it is folks. The multi-billionaires
are the real persecuted class of society.
Now, once again, I’m generalizing, but there is
a recognition that Queer acceptance comes with
a cost — or essencially assimilate into
hetero-hegimonistic social structures,
or to express one’s queerness in a way that
the hetero-hegimony is comfortable with. We are
badgered out of our queerness because cis-hetero
power structures hold our rights hostage.
And then when we exist in
poverty and homelessness,
they remind us that we only
have ourselves to blame.
Somehow, in this situation, we
are the ones who are illegal.
In the process of critically examining
our society’s laws and legal protections,
Queer Anarchy conforms to the idea of ‘be
gay, do crime’ as a rallying call. This being,
that our worth and value is not
linked to our ability to adhere
to a legal system that is in no way meant
to benefit us. And that this same system,
being ‘the law’ in a philosophical context,
exists to use force if necessary to convince us
that we should conform to social conventions
in order to benefit those who exploit us.
Doing crime in this case is not
necessarily murdering someone,
but rejecting a socially held convention
because a law says it. Instead, critically
think about who benefits from this
law? Who is this law meant to protect?
Who is this law meant to target? And most
importantly, even if a law does exist,
such as laws against sexual assault, does the
legal process consistantly acknowledge it?
Is the process likely to side
with the victim? Or the accused?
And then critically deconstruct why that is.
Once again… the answer is usually capitalism.
Not necessarily purist capitalism — as per an
adapting marketplace of ideas that rewards
merit — but crony capitalism… Which may just
be a natural inevitability of capitalism. In
an economic system which prioritises wealth,
the law simply becomes a method to protect
those who have the means to afford it.
Pride around Queerness in this context is that
your inherent existence stands in opposition to
these institutions of persecution.
If identity itself is the crime,
then we need to re-examine the definition
of what a crime is. And to do that,
we need to strip away the illusion
that laws exist to protect everyone.
Within American continental policing,
there is a bias among officers to favour
wealthy districts — because as they
are paid by the state tax dollars,
they see these people as being more responsible
for their salaries. Whereas poorer districts
are not seen as if they are worth the time.
Because property taxes are so much lower there.
So we have several groups of
people who struggle to survive,
who have no significant voice in legal processes,
and who are not protected by law enforcement.
What right do we as a society have to blame people
for developing a set of guiding moral principles
that do not align with prevailing laws, insofar as
laws are designed to protect financial interest.
As I mentioned about police being aware of where
their salaries come from, and thus feel a greater
sense of obligation to higher-income districts,
can we really say that public law enforcement is
any different than a bunch of dark-age Lords
hiring mercenaries to protect their castles?
Understanding that people do
want to exist cooperatively,
what function does law enforcement
have in a realistic way?
Many of the legal processes we have are inherited
from ancient societies. The very laws we consider
are ones to protect people are laws that
were developed within feudalism. The wealthy
protected themselves, and serfs, peasants,
servants, and slaves were just collateral.
Dating back to ancient Persia,
Egypt, Greece, India, and China,
there was a much greater openness to admit that
society was built on a structure of hierarchy.
Oftentimes the rules that divided who was above
who on a social ladder were clearly outlined and
written in stone. And there was pride in this.
Pride in being social betters among the elites,
and a sense of conforming oneself to
one’s purpose among the lower classes.
Though even with the divine right
of kings and a religious population,
the threat of rebellion was a very real, very
constant threat. The wealthy of society danced
a razors edge of amassing their wealth,
while making public displays of generosity.
Monuments, gardens, public libraries, schools,
and even negotiated time off work, festivals,
feasts — orgies! — all to give a little back
to the public they were leaching wealth out of.
Those higher on the ladder had the finances
to afford security to protect their assets.
Their land, their possessions, their business
interests. And just as much, they were protecting
themselves from rivals, they also wanted to
protect themselves from ‘social inferiors.’
The wealthy had the ear of politicians who
could then pass into legislation a system
of laws that would institutionally
protect the wealthy from the poor.
For instance, laws prohibiting theft really
accomplish nothing to protect the poor.
For most of human history, the concept of ‘owning’
‘property’ was something entirely foreign
to MOST people. Everything a serf had was
provided to them by a Lord. And owning land was
something that only those with money could do.
Anti-theft laws really only protect those who
had something worth stealing in the first place.
And in many other ways, laws which
essentially target poor people for
being in desperate situations. A crime for
which the punishment is a fine essentially
means it’s legal as long as you
have the money to sign a cheque.
Because $500 is going to hit a $15,000/year
household in a way so profoundly disruptive,
but is almost entirely unnoticeable to someone
whose net-worth is measured in stocks and bonds.
A legal system that is invested in
pursuing the more peaceful means
of coexistence among it’s people would
aim to ensure a distribution of privilege.
Rather than focusing on protecting those
who have enough of a horde to protect.
There’s that dragon again.
That there are no laws against
withholding wealth from the poor
is abundantly telling. In fact, something
like wage theft is perfectly legal.
All of this feeds into why under-privilaged
communities would opt-out of typical legal
structures in favour of their own communal systems
of accountability. And in this kind of dynamic:
survival, existence — let alone comfort —
are functionally criminal actions. Because
in order to survive, one must exist outside
the law that is forcing them either to conform,
or be silent in their suffering.
But make no mistake — our prevailing elite do not
want the under-privilaged to simply not exist or
go away. Without an underclass, the upper-class of
society would have, primarily, no basis of wealth
comparison, and secondarily, no means to exploit a
scarcity of class mobility to extort cheap labour.
The mantra of hard work equating to financial
success automatically feeds into this power
dynamic. Without this mindset, there would be
no way to continue to cast the illusion that
within America, and much of the modern world,
there exists a freedom of class mobility.
When, in fact, fluid class
mobility is the absolute last thing
an oligarchic power structure wants
Nobody’s saying that we should go out and
be criminals. To live lawlessly, selfishly.
As remarked by Oscar Wilde in the Portrait
of Dorian Grey, vice is a slide. When you
start with just a little, it’s easy to
escalate into some complete debauchery.
When we begin to discard social convention,
there’s no clear guideline as to when to stop.
Like Walter White in Breaking Bad, cooking
meth in order to pay for cancer treatment…
To keep his family safe and out of danger. Until
he, himself, became the danger. There’s a point
where you can say that you survived. But… your
survival came at the cost of breaking the law.
Why not go all out and keep it rolling?
The punishment’s not gonna get worse.
One crime begets another crime to justify it.
Where do we draw the line? When does the need for
survival become the need for comfort? When does
the need for comfort become the need for excess?
And unlike those who have money
before they start committing crimes,
we at the bottom don’t have the ability to
buy a couple of Senators in order to make
amendments to the law, making what was once
a crime legal… for the right kind of people.
Even the legalisation of marijuana is really
only legalising production for a certain few,
and keeping production illegal for the people
who have been cultivating it for decades.
More and more laws are added to our culture,
prohibiting the actions of the poor.
And at the same time we remove laws which
prohibit the actions of those rich enough
to pay for the right accountants,
exploit the right loopholes,
diversify their investments, shift their money
between so many international bank accounts that
it’s difficult for external investigators to tally
up how much money they have. How much they owe.
Which leads to situations where companies
like Apple are able to file their taxes in
ways that make it seem like they lost money.
Which then makes this company which, at times,
has had more liquid assets than the American
Federal Government, qualified for tax refunds.
You, with your 30K salary… you can’t do that.
You don’t have the money needed to pay
the cost to hide it, to exploit it.
And while there are degrees of wealth that
are, for whatever reason, impossible to tax…
at the same time, there’s no amount too
low that the government won’t want a cut.
Sales tax exists to tax those who make too
little to have to pay income or property taxes.
We live in a world where the Gateses,
the Besoses, the Musks, the Bloomburgs
all brag about how much money they have in
interviews, and yet these same people turn
around and cry to the government about how they
don’t have enough money to be worth taxing.
And nobody in the Government – at least very
few people — seem to see any problem with that.
Both Pose and Bananna Fish bombard viewers with
this messaging. Breaking Bad too. To have power
is the ability to exercise authority over
others. And authority is the ability to decide
what the law is and, by extension, influence
others’ understanding of right and wrong.
And those in positions of authority use it.
Why do you think people want
these positions in politics,
want these massive hordes of wealth, want these
authoritative roles in law enforcement — do you
think they seek out this kind of power just to
say they have it? Or are they going to use it?
Those with authority make their criminal actions
legal. And when they’re legal, they’re not wrong.
And if it’s not wrong, it’s right. And if
it’s right, you’re going to do it some more.
Banana Fish shows two kinds of criminals – those
on the streets, and those in Mansions. Those in
mansons can decide what the law is, they can
decide what a criminal is. And they decide
that those on the street hustling a couple
thousand dollars to pay their way through the
next few months are scum. They’re worse than scum,
they’re a threat to the very fabric of society.
Meanwhile these same people syphon money out
of the economy to add to their heap of gold.
They amass amounts of wealth they never intend
to spend. Money that will sit in a bank account,
accruing interest, that will forever be removed
from the economy. It will never pay an employee,
it will never buy a product, will never
pay for a service. It’s gone. Forever.
And so other people will get poorer. The
upper-middle class will become the middle class.
And the middle class will become poor.
And the poor will become destitute. When
it comes to trickle-down economics there
is only one thing that moves downward.
Desperation.
And the more people are desperate, the more
the rich can continue to manipulate laws,
can scapegoat poor people
problems on other poor people,
defund public services. The more they can
buy, the more they control, the more angles
they have to attack you and convince you
that it’s your fault that you’re poor.
Because, they say, the rich worked hard for
their money. For their wealth. For their
horde. The dragon sits atop the heap of gold
coins it did not mint, that it did not mine,
jewels it did not cut and crowns it did not
smelt. The dragon just had the power to take it,
and the power to convince everyone
else that it was invulnerable.
The great lie of mythology is that we were
convinced that we had to fight the dragon
one at a time. That, while the dragon flexes
its power, there’s a code of honour — a law,
if you will — that said we have to face it
in a duel or else our victory wouldn’t count.
We needed one brave knight to do the
fighting for us all. Instead of we,
all of us, crashing into the dragon’s
den and wrecking the son of a bitch.
But at some point the laws of
chivalry became the laws of the land.
Passed down by the men who ruled the world. The
kings and governors and presidents and, now,
the guys who took advantage of a pandemic to
become even richer than they already were.
The ones who argued that patents
on vaccines should remain intact.
The ones that fooled people into believing that
pretend, online monopoly money was the future.
That’s why I loved Banana Fish. Though the
plot is messy and overly complicated, and Ash
is a bit of a Mary Sue, and his relationship
with Eiji isn’t quite as obvious as I’d like.
I loved the show because of what
it said about the world we live in.
The evil, powerful men in the highest echelons
of organised crime and government are,
in the end, taken down because the low classes,
the downtrodden, the abused, the traumatised,
the minorities… they worked together to bring down
the power players that were keeping them down.
The street kids tore down an empire of
abuse and took some power for themselves.
The series showed that it's possible to overcome
the dragon if you work together. And so maybe,
if Ash really did die, it’s fitting. It’s fitting
that the perfect knight in shining armour,
who led the charge to take down the
dragon, didn’t survive to see the
days to come. Because the world he’d grown
up in, that empire of abuse, had fallen.
There was no place left for him in
the new world that stood around him,
and so he passed on from it. Maybe onto a new
life. Maybe he got up from that table in the New
York Public Library, got stitched up, and flew
to Japan, where he could live a different life.
One where he didn’t have to be a
knight fighting dragons anymore.
There are real people like Ash in this world,
fighting to change things, to take down the
dragons controlling us all. Abusing us.
Traumatising us. And it usually is the
ones who are most abused and traumatised, the
most desperate, that will fight the hardest.
People dying of AIDS, fighting a system set
up to ignore them. People born into the wrong
body fighting to be acknowledged for who they
really are. The sick fighting for healthcare.
The poor fighting for opportunities. And when the
system decides these battles are too inconvenient,
simply fighting them becomes illegal.
And then those knights become criminals.
So maybe becoming a criminal
is necessary sometimes.
And if the law does not reflect what
we need, maybe it’s even essential.
So be gay. Do crime. And have
a good time while you do it.